added GraphQL API RFC ideas (#14)
elorzafe/amplify-types: RFC Draft.md

## Split GraphQL operations into `query()`, `mutation()`, and `subscription()` APIs

To better capture customer intent and simplify API types we will split up the `graphql` API into individual APIs for queries, mutations, and subscriptions.

**Current Usage (v5)**

```typescript
const todoDetails: CreateTodoInput = {
  name: 'Todo 1',
  description: 'Learn AWS AppSync',
};

const newTodo = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<CreateTodoMutation>>({
  query: mutations.createTodo,
  variables: { input: todoDetails },
});

const subscription = API.graphql<GraphQLSubscription<OnCreateTodoSubscription>>(
  graphqlOperation(subscriptions.onCreateTodo)
).subscribe({
  next: ({ provider, value }) => console.log({ provider, value }),
  error: (error) => console.warn(error),
});
```

**Proposed Usage (v6)**

```typescript
type MyQueryType = {
  result: {
    id: string;
    name: string;
    description: string;
  };
};

const result = await API.query<MyQueryType>('query getTodo...', {
  variables: { ... }
});

console.log(
  `Todo : ${result.data?.id}: ${result.data?.name} (${result.data?.description})`

> );

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type MyQueryType = {
  variables: {
    filter: {
      id: number;
    };
  };
  result: {
    listTodos: {
      items: {
        id: number;
        name: string;
        description: string;
      }[];
    };
  };
};

const result = await API.query<MyQueryType>('query lisTodos...', {
  filter: { id: 123 },
});

console.log(`Todo : ${result.listTodos[0].name})`);
```

type MyMutationType = {
  variables: {
    id: number;
    name: string;
    description: string;
  };
  result: {
    id: number;
    name: string;
    description: string;
  };
};

const result = await API.mutate<MyMutationType>('mutation createTodo....', {
  variables: {
    id: 123,
    name: 'My Todo',
    description: 'This is a todo',
  },
});

console.log(
  `Todo : ${result.data?.id}: ${result.data?.name} (${result.data?.description})`

> );

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type MyMutationType = {
  variables: {
    input: {
      id: number;
      name: string;
      description: string;
    };
  };
  result: {
    createTodo: {
      id: number;
      name: string;
      description: string;
    };
  };
};

const result = await API.mutate<MyMutationType>('mutation createTodo....', {
  input: {
    id: 123,
    name: 'My Todo',
    description: 'This is a todo',
  },
});

console.log(`Todo : ${result.createTodo.id} ${result.createTodo.name} ${result.createTodo.description})`);
```

API.subscribe<MyQueryType>('subscription OnCreateTodo...').on({
  next: (result) =>
    console.log(
      `Todo info: ${result.data?.id}: ${result.data?.name} (${result.data?.description})`
    ),

> });

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type MySubscriptionType = {
  variables: {
    filter: {
      name: {
        eq: string;
      };
    };
  };
  result: {
    createTodo: {
      id: number;
      name: string;
      description: string;
    };
  };
};

API.subscribe<MySubscriptionType>('subscription OnCreateTodo...', {
  filter: {
    name: { eq: 'awesome things' },
  },
}).on({
  next: (result) => console.log(`Todo info: ${result.createTodo.name})`),
});
```

  const newTodo = res.data?.createTodo;
}

function subscribeToCreate() {
  const sub = API.graphql<GraphQLSubscription<OnCreateTodoSubscription>>(
    graphqlOperation(onCreateTodo)
  ).subscribe({
    next: (message) => {
      // once again, we could "sift up" the return value instead of providing it in two levels of depth
      const newTodo = message.value?.data?.onCreateTodo;
    }
  });
}
```

**Proposed Usage (v6)**
```ts
import { API } from 'aws-amplify';
import { createTodo } from './graphql/mutations';
import { onCreateTodo } from './graphql/subscriptions';
import { CreateTodoInput } from './API';
// so many imports from disparate modules 

function createMutation() {
  const createInput: CreateTodoInput = {
    name: 'Improve API TS support ',
  };

  const res = await API.mutate(createTodo, {
    input: createInput,
  });

  // The returned data is the result of the request. If there are more than one queries/mutations in a request,
  // then the return value stays the same as v5. i.e. res.createTodo.data
  const newTodo = res;
}

function subscribeToCreate() {
  const sub = API.subscribe(onCreateTodo).on({
    next: (message) => {

>       // Return value immediately available instead of `value?.data?.onCreateTodo`
>       const newTodo = message;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      // Return value shortened slightly from `message?.data?.onCreateTodo`.
      next: (message) => {
        console.log(message.onCreateTodo);
      },
```

    }
  });
}
```

## Flatten GraphQL operation responses
As alluded to in the previous section, we're looking to flatten the results of GraphQL operations to make them more easily accessible instead of the current three-levels-deep nested object. Would love to get your understanding on which option you prefer.

**Current Usage (v5)**
```ts
async function createNewTodo() {
  const res: GraphQLResult<Todo> = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<Todo>>(
    graphqlOperation(createTodo, {
      input: { id: uuid() },
    })
  );

  // Mutation result is nested
  console.log(res.data.createTodo); 
}
```

### Proposed behavior for single query/mutation in the response
**Proposed Option 1: Flatten to the lowest level (v6)**
```ts
async function createNewTodo() {
  const res: Todo = await API.mutate(createTodo, {
    input: { id: uuid() },
  });
  
  // Response flattened to the todo level
  console.log(res); 
}
```

**Proposed Option 2: Flatten to the `data` level (v6)**
```ts
async function createNewTodo() {

>   const res: Todo = await API.mutate(createTodo, {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  const res = await API.mutate(createTodo, {
```

    input: { id: uuid() },
  });

  // Response flattened to the `data` level
  console.log(res.createTodo); 
}

interface GraphQLData<T = object> {
  [query: string]: T // in the above example T is Todo
}
```

### Proposed behavior for multiple queries/mutations in the response

> In GraphQL, you can define multiple queries or mutations in a single request. The response object will include the result of all the queries and mutations. For example, given the following queries:

Author: ```suggestion
In GraphQL, you can define multiple queries or mutations in a single request via the `.graphql()` operation. The response object will include the result of all the queries and mutations. For example, given the following queries:
```

```ts
async function custom() {
  const operation = {
    query: `
      query GetTodo($todoId: ID!, $fooId: ID!) {
        getTodo(id: $todoId) {
          id
          name
          createdAt
          updatedAt
        }
        getFoo(id: $fooId) {
          id
          name
          createdAt
          updatedAt
        }
      }
    `,
    variables: { todoId: 'c48481bd-f808-426f-8fed-19e1368ca0bc', fooId: '9d4e6e30-fcb4-4409-8160-7d44931a6a02' },
    authToken: undefined,
    userAgentSuffix: undefined
  }
  
  const result = await API.query<MyQueryType>(operation.query, {
    variables: operation.variables

>   });

Reviewer: I must have missed this previously. But, seeing this written out this way, I feel this is not compatible with the fine-grained graphql above. I.e., until this point in the RFC, we've still been operating under the assumption that `query` is a single query/mutation.

Reviewer: Actually, maybe I misread this a little. This might be fine.

Author: ```suggestion
  const result = await API.graphql(operation.query, {
    variables: operation.variables
  });
```

You're right. I believe when we chatted on the call, we said that we'd retain the `.graphql` for this use case.

Try out the proposed `storage` types here: https://stackblitz.com/edit/rfc-typescript-v6?file=examples-storage.ts

# GraphQL `API` Category Changes

Amplify is proposing the following changes for the GraphQL `API` category to improve type safety and readability.

> ## Split GraphQL operations into `query()`, `mutation()`, and `subscription()` APIs

Author: ```suggestion
## Introduce dedicated, type-safe `query()`, `mutation()`, and `subscription()` GraphQL operation APIs
```

> To better capture customer intent and simplify API types we will split up the `graphql` API into individual APIs for queries, mutations, and subscriptions.

Author: ```suggestion
To better capture customer intent and simplify API types we will introduce dedicated APIs for queries, mutations, and subscriptions. We're going to retain the `graphql()` operation in case you want to issue multiple queries/mutations in a single request.
```

```ts
async function createNewTodo() {
  const res = await API.mutate(createTodo, {
    input: { id: uuid() },
  });

  // Response flattened to the `data` level
  console.log(res.createTodo); 
}

interface GraphQLData<T = object> {
  [query: string]: T // in the above example T is Todo
}
```

### Proposed behavior for multiple queries/mutations in the response
In GraphQL, you can define multiple queries or mutations in a single request. The response object will include the result of all the queries and mutations. For example, given the following queries:

```ts
async function custom() {
  const operation = {
    query: `
      query GetTodo($todoId: ID!, $fooId: ID!) {
        getTodo(id: $todoId) {
          id
          name
          createdAt
          updatedAt
        }
        getFoo(id: $fooId) {
          id
          name
          createdAt
          updatedAt
        }
      }
    `,
    variables: { todoId: 'c48481bd-f808-426f-8fed-19e1368ca0bc', fooId: '9d4e6e30-fcb4-4409-8160-7d44931a6a02' },
    authToken: undefined,
    userAgentSuffix: undefined
  }
  
  const result = await API.query<MyQueryType>(operation.query, {
    variables: operation.variables

>   });

Reviewer: ```suggestion
async function custom() {

  type MyMultiQueryType = {
    variables: {
      input: {
        todoId: string;
        fooId: string;
      };
    };
    result: {
      getTodo: {
        id: number;
        name: string;
        createdAt: Date;
        updatedAt: Date;
      };
      getFoo: {
        id: number;
        name: string;
        createdAt: Date;
        updatedAt: Date;
      };
    };
  };

  const operation = {
    query: `
      query GetTodo($todoId: ID!, $fooId: ID!) {
        getTodo(id: $todoId) {
          id
          name
          createdAt
          updatedAt
        }
        getFoo(id: $fooId) {
          id
          name
          createdAt
          updatedAt
        }
      }
    `,
    variables: { todoId: 'c48481bd-f808-426f-8fed-19e1368ca0bc', fooId: '9d4e6e30-fcb4-4409-8160-7d44931a6a02' },
    authToken: undefined,
    userAgentSuffix: undefined
  }
  
  const result = await API.graphql<MyMultiQueryType>(operation.query, {
    variables: operation.variables
  });
```

    graphqlOperation(onCreateTodo)
  ).subscribe({
    next: (message) => {
      // once again, we could "sift up" the return value instead of providing it in two levels of depth
      const newTodo = message.value?.data?.onCreateTodo;
    }
  });
}
```

**Proposed Usage (v6)**
```ts
import { API } from 'aws-amplify';
import { createTodo } from './graphql/mutations';
import { onCreateTodo } from './graphql/subscriptions';
import { CreateTodoInput } from './API';
// so many imports from disparate modules 

function createMutation() {
  const createInput: CreateTodoInput = {
    name: 'Improve API TS support ',
  };

  const res = await API.mutate(createTodo, {
    input: createInput,
  });

  // The returned data is the result of the request. If there are more than one queries/mutations in a request,
  // then the return value stays the same as v5. i.e. res.createTodo.data
  const newTodo = res;
  console.log('new todo created', newTodo);
}

function subscribeToCreate() {
  const sub = API.subscribe(onCreateTodo).on({
    next: (message) => {
      // Return value immediately available instead of `value?.data?.onCreateTodo`
      const newTodo = message;

>       console.log('new todo created', newTodo);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

};

const result = await API.mutate<MyMutationType>('mutation createTodo....', {
  variables: {
    id: 123,
    name: 'My Todo',
    description: 'This is a todo',
  },
});

console.log(
  `Todo : ${result.data?.id}: ${result.data?.name} (${result.data?.description})`
);

API.subscribe<MyQueryType>('subscription OnCreateTodo...').on({
  next: (result) =>
    console.log(
      `Todo info: ${result.data?.id}: ${result.data?.name} (${result.data?.description})`
    ),
});
```

## Less verbose type definitions for generated queries, mutations, and subscriptions
In v6, we want to reduce the verbosity of the typings for the code-generated queries, mutations, and subscriptions by inferring their types from the generated code.

**Current Usage (v5)**
```ts
import { API, graphqlOperation } from 'aws-amplify';
import { GraphQLQuery, GraphQLSubscription } from '@aws-amplify/api';
import { createTodo } from './graphql/mutations';
import { onCreateTodo } from './graphql/subscriptions';
import {
  CreateTodoInput,
  CreateTodoMutation,
  OnCreateTodoSubscription,
} from './API';
// so many imports from disparate modules 

function createMutation() {
  const createInput: CreateTodoInput = {

>     name: 'Improve API TS support ',

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    name: 'Improve API TS support',
```

  };

  // Verbose explicit type definition when the information could be available in `createTodo`'s type
  const res = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<CreateTodoMutation>>(
    graphqlOperation(createTodo, {
      input: createInput,
    })
  );

  // the returned data is nested 2 levels deep and could be upleveled when the GraphQL document
  // only includes one query or mutation
  const newTodo = res.data?.createTodo;

>   console.log('new todo created', newTodo);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

>   console.log('new todo created', newTodo);

Reviewer 2: IMO we can leave out the console.logs unless we're using it to show something about the structure of the result

}

function subscribeToCreate() {
  const sub = API.graphql<GraphQLSubscription<OnCreateTodoSubscription>>(
    graphqlOperation(onCreateTodo)
  ).subscribe({
    next: (message) => {
      // once again, we could "sift up" the return value instead of providing it in two levels of depth
      const newTodo = message.value?.data?.onCreateTodo;
      

>       console.log('new todo created', newTodo);

Reviewer 2: Ditto

    }
  });
}
```

**Proposed Usage (v6)**
```ts
import { API, graphqlOperation } from 'aws-amplify';
import { GraphQLQuery, GraphQLSubscription } from '@aws-amplify/api';
import { createTodo } from './graphql/mutations';
import { onCreateTodo } from './graphql/subscriptions';
import {
  CreateTodoInput,
  CreateTodoMutation,
  OnCreateTodoSubscription,
} from './API';

> // so many imports from disparate modules 

Reviewer 2: I think we might want to leave the imports out of the sample to direct focus onto the changes. Regardless, for this example there a few unused imports we can clean up I think.

Author: agree removed.

function createMutation() {
  const createInput: CreateTodoInput = {
    name: 'Improve API TS support ',
  };

  const res = await API.mutate(createTodo, {

>       input: createInput,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    input: createInput,
```

(tabbing)

  });

  // The returned data is the result of the request. If there are more than one queries/mutations in a request,
  // then the return value stays the same as v5. i.e. res.createTodo.data

>   const newTodo = res;

Reviewer 2: Makes sense, curious what the type definition would look like to support both cases. Will customers always need to check what type of response they're dealing with, or will the type system help resolve this some how?

Author: No customers don't need to check for it as long as they're using our auto-generated queries, mutations, and subscriptions, there's going to be inference. If they're not, then it'll remain as the current set up

  console.log('new todo created', newTodo);
}

function subscribeToCreate() {
  const sub = API.subscribe(onCreateTodo).on({
    next: (message) => {
      // Return value immediately available instead of `value?.data?.onCreateTodo`
      const newTodo = message;
      console.log('new todo created', newTodo);
    }
  });
}
```

## Type safety for GraphQL query, mutation, subscription inputs

> In v6, we want to ensure type safety on GraphQL inputs if you use one of the generated GraphQL query, mutation, or subscription.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In v6, we want to ensure type safety on GraphQL inputs if you use one of the generated GraphQL queries, mutations, or subscriptions.
```

**Current Usage (v5)**
```ts
import { updateTodo } from './graphql/mutations';
import { CreateTodoInput } from './API';

const createInput: CreateTodoInput = {
  name: todoName,
  description,
};

const res = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<UpdateTodoMutation>>(
  graphqlOperation(updateTodo, {
    // passing an object of type CreateTodoInput (that's missing
    // a required field for updates `id`) into an update mutation's input
    // does not surface a type error. This will only throw a runtime error after
    // the mutation request gets rejected by AppSync
    input: createInput,
  })
);
```

**Proposed Usage (v6)**
```ts
import { updateTodo } from './graphql/mutations';
import { CreateTodoInput } from './API';

const createInput: CreateTodoInput = {
  name: todoName,
  description,
};

const res = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<UpdateTodoMutation>>(
  graphqlOperation(updateTodo, {
    input: createInput,

>     //^? Throws a type error. `input` must be of type `UpdateTodoInput`

Reviewer: Not a great example, probably. If these types overlap sufficiently, TS will *not* throw an error here, despite the types appearing mismatched.

Author: I thought on update, you always have to provide an ID, where as on create it's optional.

Reviewer: Oh yeah. 🤦 That makes sense!

>     input: createInput,
>     //^? Throws a type error. `input` must be of type `UpdateTodoInput`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    input: createInput, // Throws a type error, `input` must be of type `UpdateTodoInput`
```

  })

> );

Reviewer: Should this sample omit the generic types and intermediate `graphqlOperation` call?

Author: agree. removing it.

```

## [Bug fix: Remove `any` cast needed for subscriptions](https://github.com/aws-amplify/amplify-js/issues/7589#issuecomment-1258596131)

> In v5, there's a type mismatch bug for GraphQL subscriptions that forces the developer to cast to `any` to unsubscribe. We plan on fixing this for v6.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In v5, there's a type mismatch bug for GraphQL subscriptions that forces the developer to cast to `any` to subscribe or unsubscribe. We plan on fixing this for v6.
```

(just based on the samples)

**Current Usage (v5)**
```ts

>   subscription.value = (API.graphql(graphqlOperation(
>     SUBSCRIBE_USER,
>     { id: userId }
>   )) as any).subscribe({ next: onSubscribe })
> // . . .
>   (subscription.value as any).unsubscribe()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
subscription.value = (API.graphql(graphqlOperation(
  SUBSCRIBE_USER,
  { id: userId }
)) as any).subscribe({ next: onSubscribe })

(subscription.value as any).unsubscribe()
```

```

**Proposed Usage (v6)**
```ts
  subscription = API.subscribe(

>     SUBSCRIBE_USER,

Reviewer: Where does `SUBSCRIBE_USER` come from?

Per our discussion around V6 goals, we can only automatically type this if this is one of the code generated queries. (Or if the customer creates a "nominally typed" query themselves.)

Author: added imports

>   subscription = API.subscribe(
>     SUBSCRIBE_USER,
>     { id: userId }
>   ).on({ next: onSubscribe })
> // . . .
>   subscription.unsubscribe()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
subscription = API.subscribe(
  SUBSCRIBE_USER,
  { id: userId }
).on({ next: onSubscribe })

subscription.unsubscribe()
```

  };

  const res = await API.mutate(createTodo, {
    input: createInput,
  });

  // The returned data is the result of the request. If there are more than one queries/mutations in a request,
  // then the return value stays the same as v5. i.e. res.createTodo.data
  const newTodo = res;

>   console.log('new todo created', newTodo);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

}
```

> ## Flatten the GraphQL operations' responses

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Flatten GraphQL operation responses
```

> As alluded to in the prior suggestion, we're looking to flatten the results for the GraphQL operations to make them more easily accessible instead of the current three-levels-deep nested object. Would love to get your understanding on which option you prefer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As alluded to in the previous section, we're looking to flatten the results of GraphQL operations to make them more easily accessible instead of the current three-levels-deep nested object. Would love to get your understanding on which option you prefer.
```

**Current Usage (v5)**
```ts
async function createNewTodo() {
  const res: GraphQLResult<Todo> = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<Todo>>(
    graphqlOperation(createTodo, {
      input: { id: uuid() },
    })
  );

>   // todo result is nested
>   console.log(res.data.createTodo); 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

  // Mutation result is nested
  console.log(res.data.createTodo); 
```

}

> 
> interface GraphQLResult<T = object> {
>     data?: T; // in the above example T is Todo
>     errors?: GraphQLError[];
>     extensions?: {
>         [key: string]: any;
>     };
> }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

IMO we can leave the type definitions out of the MD itself and surface them in the sandbox instead, what do you think?

```

### Proposed behavior for single query/mutation in the response
**Proposed Option 1: Flatten to the lowest level (v6)**
```ts
async function createNewTodo() {

>   const res: Todo = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<Todo>>(
>     graphqlOperation(createTodo, {
>       input: { id: uuid() },
>     })
>   );

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  const res: Todo = await API.mutate(createTodo, {
    input: { id: uuid() },
  });
```

These v6 examples should probably use the proposed DX from the previous section, or do you think they should be kept separate?

>   // res flattened to todo level

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // Response flattened to the todo level
```

  console.log(res); 
}
```

**Proposed Option 2: Flatten to the `data` level (v6)**
```ts
async function createNewTodo() {

>   const res: GraphQLData<Todo> = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<Todo>>(
>     graphqlOperation(createTodo, {
>       input: { id: uuid() },
>     })
>   );

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  const res: Todo = await API.mutate(createTodo, {
    input: { id: uuid() },
  });
```

Ditto on new proposed syntax

>   // res in at .data level
>   console.log(res.createTodo); 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

  // Response flattened to the `data` level
  console.log(res.createTodo); 
```

}

interface GraphQLData<T = object> {
  [query: string]: T // in the above example T is Todo

> }

Reviewer 2: Makes sense to leave this type in I think, explains what the `createTodo` actually is

```

### Proposed behavior for multiple queries/mutations in the response
In GraphQL, you can define multiple queries or mutations in a single request. The response object will include the result of all the queries and mutations. For example, given the following queries:

```ts
async function custom() {
  const operation = {
    query: `
      query GetTodo($todoId: ID!, $fooId: ID!) {
        getTodo(id: $todoId) {
          id
          name
          createdAt
          updatedAt
        }
        getFoo(id: $fooId) {
          id
          name
          createdAt
          updatedAt
        }
      }
    `,
    variables: { todoId: 'c48481bd-f808-426f-8fed-19e1368ca0bc', fooId: '9d4e6e30-fcb4-4409-8160-7d44931a6a02' },
    authToken: undefined,
    userAgentSuffix: undefined
  }

>   const res = await API.graphql<GraphQLQuery<any>>(operation);

Reviewer 2: Ditto about using the new proposed DX (I think the below looks right, please double check me)

```suggestion
  
  const result = await API.query<MyQueryType>(operation.query, {
    variables: operation.variables
  });
```

  description,
};

const res = await API.mutate(updateTodo, {

>     input: createInput, // Throws a type error. `input` must be of type `UpdateTodoInput`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // @ts-expect-error
    input: createInput, // `input` must be of type `UpdateTodoInput`
```

(feedback from Manuel on some Hub types that makes sense here)
